And I think this was an awakening of
what the Buddhists would call
bodhicitta, the desire to save all
sentient beings. And and I the way I
came to understand it later, I didn't
understand it at the time. It was
basically reminding me of a commitment
that I had made before I was born, what
my incarnation was about, and it was
basically awakening my compassion.
>> Keep watching to learn more.
For early access to our videos and live
stream events, sign up for our free
weekly newsletter at
newthinkingaloud.org.
New thinking aloud is presented by the
California Institute for Human Science,
a fully accredited university offering
distant learning graduate degrees that
focus on mind, body, and spirit. the
topics that we cover here. We are
particularly excited to announce new
degrees emphasizing parasychology and
the paranormal. Visit their website at
cihs.edu.
>> Book four in the new thinking aloud
dialogue series is Charles T. Tart 70
years of exploring consciousness and
parasychology.
Now available on Amazon.
>> [music]
>> Thinking Aloud,
Conversations on the Leading Edge of
Knowledge and Discovery with
psychologist Jeffrey Michionlo.
[music]
Hello and welcome. I'm Jeffrey
Michionlo. Today is a special day. I'm
here in Albuquerque with a live guest in
my little studio. I'm with Chris Bash.
He has been interviewed several times on
New Thinking Aloud previously. Chris is
an ameritus professor from Acron State
University in Ohio. He is the author of
several books including Life Cycles, a
book about reincarnation,
Dark Knight, Early Dawn, The Living
Classroom, and LSD and the Mind of the
Universe. Welcome, Chris.
>> Thank you, Jeeoff. It's a pleasure to be
here with you. It's a real pleasure to
be here with you in person in in the
flesh after having watched so many uh
videos with you and having been on the
live stream with with you as well. I
thought today would be an opportunity
for our viewers who have many of whom
will have watched these interviews
because they were quite popular uh to
get to know you personally. M I I know
for example you've talked about your
life a little bit that at one time you
were considering joining the Catholic
priesthood.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I was in the seminary for
four years.
>> Three years in high school and one year
in college.
>> That's a very serious commitment to
enter the seminary while you're still in
high school.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So you had a a Catholic upbringing.
had a a a very kind of ecumenically
broad but strong Catholic uh upbringing
down in the deep south in Vixsburg,
Mississippi. Uh my family comes from
Louisiana on both sides. Uh so that
French Catholic heritage down in the in
New Orleans uh area and so we were
Catholic and I'll tell you
I don't remember a time in my life when
I didn't want to be a priest. I mean
when I kind of became aware, became
conscious and certainly by the time I'm
5 years old, I remember having memories
of wanting to be a priest. It wasn't,
you know, encouraged by my family. It
wasn't part of that. It just was there
in the beginning. And uh so I went into
seminary as soon as I could in high
school. They don't have high school
seminaries anymore because they weren't
really effective in in yielding priests.
[clears throat]
>> But I did. I went into seminary and uh
stayed in until my freshman year in
college and then basically decided that
uh celibacy and I weren't cut out for
each other uh and left.
>> It's not as if you left Catholicism at
that point.
>> No, I was at Notre Dame and I got my
degree in theology uh at the University
of Notre Dame. Uh but by the time I
finished my undergraduate work, I was no
longer a Catholic in any normative
sense. and I went to Cambridge and I
studied New Testament criticism and I my
the search for the historical Jesus was
my earliest uh academic love. Uh and by
the time I left Cambridge I really was
no longer a Christian. The historical
Jesus actually was my way out of
Christianity and into a larger world of
spiritual teachers.
>> I see what happened exactly.
Well, you know, I learned Greek and
Hebrew and all the languages one needs
to become a young scholar of New
Testament and the search for the
historical Jesus after several years at
undergraduate and then these two years
at Cambridge. I think I got a pretty
good grounding of where research was
taking us, where we were going to be
going in future years in that area. And
I I felt I had a good strong grounding
in the best historians's assessment of
who this man was and what he what he
made what was made of him and the
theology and theological interpretations
that followed really couldn't capture I
think or adequately convey the depth and
power of this person and I encountered
in him an intensity of of spiritual
awareness
u that was larger than the
christologology that had internalized.
And then when I began to study world
religions more broadly, I began to
realize that there were other beings who
had this same deep quality of spiritual
connection. And so I was I opened up
from I never left Christianity. I just
opened up into a larger family of
religious discourse. Uh that took me I
taught world religions for decades, you
know, on on the arm of Houston Smith.
His books were the ones that I used in
my courses. And so I would travel the
world every semester learning from the
great uh spiritual traditions of the
world.
>> Well, Houston Smith was a good friend of
mine. I did oh at least half a dozen or
more interviews with him.
>> I got to know him well in in the days
when I I started doing interviews in the
San Francisco Bay area. To me, he he was
a a guiding light and a saint.
>> He really was. and and probably next to
Stan Grath as a single individuals had a
the largest impact on my mind because I
taught out of his books in world
religions for so many years.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah. Wonderful man.
>> And Stan Gruff was also a big influence
on you.
>> Huge. When I finished my graduate work
in Brown in philosophy of religion uh
and I was looking for where to take my
work next, I encountered the work of two
people who had a huge impact on me. One
was Ian Stevenson at the University of
Virginia, his work on reincarnation. And
he convinced me in one reading of his
book 20 cases suggestive of
reincarnation that reincarnation is
simply true. It's just a fact. And that
meant erasing seven years of
undergraduate and graduate school
because it had nowhere in my studies had
reincarnation been taken seriously.
neither in the western religions nor in
the scientific traditions which had
erased the western traditions in some
ways in my thinking.
>> Yeah. [snorts]
>> And so I had to start all over again and
figure out if reincarnation is true,
what does that tell us about the world
we're living in?
>> Well, what does it mean by true?
>> Yeah, I think it's just a fact of
nature. It's just an aspect of life. We
there's so much we don't understand
about it. We don't understand the
details of how. We don't understand
anything about the physics of the soul.
But the the phenomenology,
the phenomenological evidence shows us
that our mind predates our body and that
[snorts] our current life is part of a
tapestry of a much larger uh causal web
of lives stretching through time. And I
began to understand that if you don't
understand reincarnation,
then you really don't you can't
understand much that's happening in this
world. It's like trying to take one
chapter out of a Sherlock Holmes novel
and trying to understand the entire book
and all you have is that one chapter. We
need the other chapters to really
understand uh the things that led into
this life and what we're studying in
this starting in this life continuing on
in other lifetimes. Would do you
seem to uh feel that everybody has a a
chain of historical incarnations that
they've experienced?
>> Well, in generally I think so, but of
course uh there have to be beginners
somewhere. They have to be people in
their first lifetime or second or third
lifetime. And then it's it's like at a
university there are freshmen and there
are seniors and there are people who
have been at this game for a longer
period of time. And the spiritual
traditions often refer to those as old
souls as a metaphor uh for someone who's
gathered sufficient experience that
they've spiritually matured over the
course of their lifetimes.
>> I would imagine as a student of theology
there would be in the literature many
other options besides reincarnation.
>> Yeah. Yep. They are. But this to me is
is not a theological proposition. I mean
for a long time it was discussed in
theological or philosophical terms and
debated. But I think in the last 50
years it's moved from the theologian's
table to the psychologist table. It's
become a matter of empirical research
and the empirical research I think is
overwhelming. So the first book I wrote
was my response to Ian Stevenson. And
there I just basically my conviction is
we have overwhelming empirical evidence.
Stevenson's research and the research on
coming out of past life therapy, Roger
Wilgger for example and other past life
therapists cumulatively there is
sufficient evidence to make this the
most reasonable hypothesis for
understanding life. And that conviction
is only deepened in my psychedelic work
and in my other studies through the
years. And that brings me to the second
person that I encountered both in my
first year when I was just beginning my
academic career was Stan Grath. His book
Realms of the Human Unconscious, which
had just been published then, was a
turning point for me. When I read it, I
immediately recognized that Stan's work
was incredibly important, not just for
psychology and therapy, but for
philosophy, my discipline. Uh, and I
knew I needed I wanted to get involved
in this. I felt a calling and I knew
that the I felt that the people who
would be doing the most important work
in my field of philosophy of religion
would be speaking out of an experiential
basis not simply a theoretical basis and
I knew it would take time it would take
a long time uh to really do serious work
in the area. So I settled in in 1979 and
began a course of uh LSD therapy
following Stan's protocols
>> and that ended up lasting much longer
than I had expected. It ended up lasting
20 years of active work.
>> In fact, I'd have to say I think of you
as one of the foremost psychonauts,
if I can use that term, of whom I'm
aware you took it very methodically,
very seriously over years. keeping
careful records of your experiences and
with a clear idea of the goal.
>> Well, you know, yeah. Uh, and many
misunderstandings and
misinterpretations. I mean, I had a
limited understanding of the psyche and
a limited understanding of how this work
would proceed and those had to fall away
over time. But in the beginning, I well,
let me back up. I had been practicing
meditation for years since undergraduate
work and in through graduate school. Had
started with transcendental meditation
and then moved into vipasina meditation
and had experienced the usual blocks
that people have in the first years of
their meditation practice. And when I
met Stan's work, I thought, "Oh, here's
a way in which I can push through these
blocks faster. I could burn up my karma
faster. uh and I would get on the other
side and I would become enlightened
faster. Well, uh, that's not the way it
kind of worked out because I I came to
understand that
the the fundamental model that we were
using in the transpersonal community was
still a model of personal transformation
that you did your work, you encountered,
you you you sort of cleansed your own
karma, you you dealt with your past
lives, you cleared up your inner
baggage, uh, and then you would move
into some heightened state of spiritual
sensitivity
>> like you're finished.
>> I'm yeah come enlightened and that was
you know but uh what happened was not
that and I think it was partly because
of the very aggressive protocol I
adopted. Now Stan outlines two
protocols. Psycholytic therapy, lowd
dose where you peel the psyche layer by
layer, piece by piece, and highdose
psychedelic therapy where in the Spring
Grove program in Maryland, they were
using highdose therapy for uh to to
address uh anxiety, death anxiety among
people who were terminally ill. And it
was limited to three sessions. So coming
along later, I thought, well, if you
could do it safely three times, you
could do it safely more times. And
because I was married at the time and
soon there would be children coming
along. And it was hard to get time away
from dual career family for a weekend of
this type of deep inner work. I decided
to do psychedelic therapy. you working
with high doses thinking I would if I
could maintain the stability needed to
work creatively and productively at
these high states. I would basically
chew up my karma faster. I would clean
my plate faster. But what happened of
course is if you work with highly
amplified states of consciousness,
you you not pretty soon you just shatter
the boundaries of your personal psyche.
So the working dynamic becomes larger
than anything which could be explained
in terms of your personal psyche even
your personal enlightenment. Within a
couple of years I was being drawn into
vast experiential territories that
really didn't have too much to do with
me personally. And over time I came to
understand that I was engaging um what
you might think of as coex systems or
systems of condensed experiences within
the collective psyche. what I called
metacoic systems that there was some way
in which my individual work had been
changed into
serving not my personal clarification
but somehow contributing a small piece
to the clarification of the human psyche
as a whole to the collective
unconscious.
>> Are you suggesting then that you had
personal issues that did not get
addressed? Oh, no. They got addressed uh
both before and after that work.
>> So, it wasn't a spiritual bypass.
>> No. Yeah. When if you keep coming back
over and over again, sooner or later,
the universe is going to clean you up.
You know, it may clean you up in the
beginning using one protocol, it'll
clean you up later using another
protocol. But if you keep engaging, you
know, the deep energy of life, it's
going to bring out all your shadow
material, all your former life material.
It's going to release you from the from
the pains that bind you.
>> Uh yeah.
>> So that happened and then you entered
into this state uh
I guess one way to put it and if I
recall you used the phrase the
consciousness of humanity.
>> Yes. What I found was that when you when
the bubble of your personal psyche pops,
you know, when that egoic bubble pops
>> and is no longer the organizing matrix
for your experience, you don't simply
pop into unitive non-dual consciousness.
There many layers of conscious between
your individual ego and unitive
consciousness or the consciousness of
God or something like this. There is all
these layers of the collective
unconsciousness, the mind of the
species, the psyche of the pe of the
species. And early on in my work when I
was transitioning after I'd gone through
what Stan would have described as a
classic perinatal death rebirth process
where my individual psyche was just
shattered.
Then I went through an experience where
I was confronting
the killing of thousands and thousands
of children just being mauled and maimed
by soldiers. And I I was powerless to be
able to stop it. Uh and I think this was
an awakening of what the Buddhists would
call bodhicitta, the desire to save all
sentient beings. And I the way I came to
understand it later, I didn't understand
it at the time. It was basically
reminding me of a commitment that I had
made before I was born, what my
incarnation was about. And it was
basically awakening my compassion so
that I would do anything if given the
opportunity to save the children, to
save the lives of the children. and then
began a two-year process of entering
into this ocean of suffering. In the in
the cleansing portion of the sessions,
of course, there's the ecstatic portion
and the cleansing portion, but in the
cleansing portion, there's this huge
deeper and deeper and deeper experience
of the terrible suffering that still
resides within the collective psyche.
All the things that we've done to each
other, all the wars and the killing and
the being killed and all the rapes and
all the droughts and all the suffering
of humanity, anything which is
unresolved in any individual's life by
the time they die accumulates in the in
the psyche. And just as our individual
trauma
compromises our individual clarity, our
collective trauma compromises our
collective clarity. And for some reason,
a large portion of my work for those
years involved draining some of that
toxicity out of the collective psyche.
And I don't think there's anything
unique to me and certainly nothing
unique to psychedelics about that work.
I think there are many many beings at
all sorts of levels who are working
primarily
in service of healing the collective
psyche to make humanity more able to
take advantage of the shifts of energy
that are coming to us in history
>> because I would think if you're in touch
with the psyche of humanity in addition
to the enormity of the pain and and the
suffering the needless pain and and and
suffering uffing the cruel heartless
pain and suffering. There are also many
things to feel differently about the the
the ambitions of people, the visions
that people have, the joy that people
have, the creativity that has been
expressed and art and music and
literature.
>> Yeah. and the genius. Mhm.
>> What happened for me is that um in the
first year of experiencing the ocean of
suffering when I would go through the
the crisis and and go through a breaking
point and surrender to that then I was
taken for the first time into what I
came to call deep time
>> and I [clears throat] was taken as for a
year and seven sessions I experienced my
entire life from beginning to end as a
single totality and I was given or an an
in set of insights into what my life was
about uh into personal relationships
that I was involved in about my work in
at the university uh but it was very
kind of personal was at the psychic
level of transpersonal experience and
then I stopped my work for six years for
reasons I described in the book and when
I resumed a year six years later the
ocean of suffering began exactly where
it had stopped and it kept getting
deeper and deeper worse and worse
But what was happening in the ecstatic
portion of those sessions is that I
entered what I call the initiation into
the universe. I was being initiated. I
was like I was g given a crash course in
cosmology 101. Being given a series of
experiences that far transcended my
individual life and opened me to some of
the fundamental metaphysical truths of
existence.
In that process, as that process
continued to deepen, I kept being
immersed in the collective psyche of
humanity and I was being basically
taught. I've always had a sense of being
guided in my sessions by a a higher
intelligence, a higher consciousness
that never manifested in any
a figural form. It never adopted a form.
It was always invisible. Uh but it was
always there, always guiding me. and
instructing me and it so I I dissolved
in the collective psyche repeatedly and
was taught ways the ways in which our
individual minds are part of part of our
species mind. Even our individual
diseases are part of the the collective
diseases that we are processing in
history. And that everything we do
individually, both the acquisition of
our of our problems and the solution of
those problems come from and radiate
back into the collective psyche. And
even our diseases come out of our
humanity stage of our evolutionary
history. And as we heal those diseases,
that healing goes out and ripples out
into the collective. And that's the
primary thing I was addressing in Dark
Knight Early Dawn. I was beginning to
understand that there is no such thing
as private karma. It's all collective
karma in the end. Just as there is no
separate private identity, but always an
interconnected webwork of identity.
There is no such thing as private karma.
We're always drawing from and feeding
back into the karma of our species.
We're all growing together. We're all
arm in- arm. We're all developing it
together. And this was sort of laid out
for me over and over clearly in clear
and clear instructions. And it's very
interesting. I mean, it would take me
through a series of instructions and
then double back and take me through it
again and again until it was sure that I
understood. And then we would go on to
the next lesson. as if you were
following a curriculum.
>> It was and it was not a curriculum of my
own making. It didn't come out of my
studies. It didn't come out of my
reading. It was the only teacher I've
ever had and all the only spiritual
teacher I've ever had has been the
universe out of this in this kind of
profound encounter and communion and
then surrendering and let it teach me
whatever it wanted me to know. On the
one hand, you're learning from the
universe and on the other hand, it's
being facilitated by a very particular
molecule. Yeah. Isn't that interesting?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. And of course, we have hundreds,
thousands of molecules we find in nature
that facilitate these amplified states
of consciousness. It just happens that
LSD happens to be a synthesized version
uh that came from Albert Hoffman's work.
But the fundamental dynamic is the same.
It amplifies consciousness for a few
hours at a time. And how you use that
amplified state
determines whether you're just having an
enjoyable afternoon with the grateful
dead or whether you're having a
spiritually
uh cleansing, purifying process that
then opens you up into some of the
deeper uh currents of the divine life.
Well, it's very clear from your
background which path you chose. I I
assume you weren't exactly a party
animal. [laughter]
>> No. Uh you know, I I left the
priesthood, but in some ways the
priesthood never left me. And
[clears throat] then as I learned more
about the eastern traditions and my
meditation practice deepened and I was
teaching courses on comparative
mysticism and advanced courses on
Buddhism, I just I always um considered
the spiritual teachers from multiple
religious traditions to be my mentors
and trying to live up to the examples
that they gave us
>> in your LSD sessions and and the layers
that you described. I would imagine that
the next obvious layer after the
consciousness of humanity as a whole
which is huge would would be the
ecosystem of of the planet that we share
because our species is not isolated
either.
>> Absolutely. But it's interesting my work
didn't go in that direction. Many
people's do especially I think when
they're using organic psychedelics like
psilocybin or iawasa uh many people have
deep experiences of the deeper web work
of life and and the fabric of life.
>> Mine didn't. And over time I the best
I've been able to understand why it went
the way it went and didn't go is because
um humanity forms the greatest danger to
life on this planet.
>> We are the problem and my work seemed to
be really narrowly focused on helping
transform helping humanity transform its
consciousness. And if humanity can come
to a clarity and resolution of its of
its negative karma and a spiritual
awakening then the planet will be safe.
The planet will can be revived. We'll be
safe because we will not use our
intellect in a way which is at the
expense of other life forms.
So I didn't go laterally. I just I kind
of went deeper. Mhm.
>> So what happened when I kind of after
spending years working at the collective
level I went through a process where
I went through another cycle of birth
and death. In the beginning I thought oh
you go through ego death and that's the
death and then you enter into
transpersonal reality spiritual reality.
What I found was that that's not quite
so easy that there are multiple layers
of death that you go to go through as
you go into deeper and deeper layers of
the universe. So after I had been
working kind of at the collective layer
for some time, I went through a process
where the my entire identity as a human
being began to fall away from me. And I
found that we have we have an identity
which is deeper than our personal
identity.
>> And just as ego death, your personal
identity falls away, still you have a a
human identity which is underneath. And
that began to fall away. And when that
fall away, all the stories, all the
mythologies, all the theologies, all the
religions of the world fell away.
>> And I entered into states of
consciousness that were radically beyond
human history. It was as if it it had
the quality of like being in the space
station, international space station,
far above the earth and all the details
of the earth are just fallen away and I
was in a world of extraordinary quiet
stillness. And then a new round of
teaching began. And the new round of
teaching was taking me into archetypal
reality. the layers of reality that that
are beyond uh the layers that stand in
between the unitive source from which
all life springs. And yet it unfolds in
layers. And some of those layers we call
archetypal, not one layer, but multiple
layers. They structure, they manifest,
they create time and space. They
manifest time and space. They're the
fundamental constituences
that lead to time and space as we know
it. And then I spent a couple years
working there.
>> Well, that's very interesting. I I had a
mentor years ago, Arthur M. Young, who
was a cosmologist and an inventor,
>> and he would sometimes
poke us with a question.
was how do you reconcile being a single
unique individual separate from
everything and at the same time one with
everything.
>> Yeah, that is the paradox isn't it?
>> And and he said the answer is in what he
called the realm of mythos mythology or
the archetypal realm is is the realm
that connects the two.
>> Interesting. Yeah, I can understand
that. You know in some spiritual
traditions uh they sacrifice the
individual and the vision is that when
you achieve realization or spiritual
awakening you dissolve as a drop in the
ocean. You return to the ocean the the
drop dissolves and you are now one with
the divine and there is no more
individual separate individual at all.
>> But that's not been my experience. My
experiences has been that
the boundaries of the individual are
radically expanded. The commerce with
the surround is radically expanded.
There is no separate individuality, but
there is nevertheless an individuality.
I've come to believe that individuality
is one of the great gifts that the
physical universe gives us. And that
gift is not simply to be returned when
we're make contact with unitive reality
but actually there is a there is a
suffusion that uh union actually
requires a highly developed
individuality to sustain it. And then
individuality allows us to enter to grow
and be nourished by this communion and
to become a deeper kind of individuality
than we were at earlier stages. But
always there is this there these two
fundamental truths.
The truth of oneness and the truth of
individuality which which shares and
receives and that interconnected truth
that Buddhism emphasizes so much. The
truth of interdependent co-oris
in
>> interdependent co-arising. It's as if
the this selfcreation of the universe.
>> Yes. And we are part of that. We're part
of the manifestation. We're part of his
evolutionary journey and uh we are its
children and we are we are an edge and
as it explores itself. We here's where I
get stuck a little bit and I think maybe
you can help me through this impass. If
you're dealing in the archetypal realm
as as you've described, to my
understanding, all of the archetypes
that we know are expressed in human
terms. Yeah.
>> The father archetype, the mother
archetype, the hero, and and so on. But
you're also saying that you move beyond
human terms. So, how how do the
archetypes manifest when you're beyond
the the the human side of things?
>> Yeah, good question.
You know, uh I experienced archetypes
that affirmed Jung's understanding of
the collective psyche, but I didn't
experience archetypes the way he
describes archetypes. I didn't
experience the wise old man or the wise
woman or the tropster, trickster. I
didn't experience archetypes in that
form. I don't not saying they don't
exist. It's just not how I experienced
it.
>> The other major voice in archetypes is
Plato who conceptualize archetypes as
unchanging ideas in the mind of an
eternal being. So they are the
blueprints, the unchanging blueprints
which are used in creation. And I didn't
experience archetypes in that way
either. I experience archetypes as vast,
massive beings living on a different
order of time, a different order of
reality. So vast that I literally could
not wrap my mind around them. I could
not see them. The closest I could come
to seeing them, my mind imaged them as
galaxies, you know, just vast,
>> completely different order and not
static like galaxies moving very slow
relative to a solar system spin
>> but deliberately and on a different
scale of existence. And that's how I
experience archetypes. Not human, not in
any human form, profoundly transcended
to the human project. and yet
crystallizing the human project as their
own intention. So the basic image that
comes down is kind of classic
Shriarbindo kind of image where the one
cascades into layers and layers and
layers and some of those layers we
called archetypal and I guess if we get
down to the lower layers we may find
wise old man wise old woman those human
forms but at the deeper levels we're
looking at the cosmic principles of
creation the living beings that kind of
manifest time and space and orders
within in time and space. But I only
spent about a year and a half touching
these realities which is the pittance. I
mean, you know, in no way an exhaustive
account of them. And then I was moved on
into another layer
>> even beyond the archetypes.
>> Beyond the archetypes uh beyond the
archetypes because the archetypes
emerge out of a deeper level of reality,
a non-duel, a unitive, a oneness that
births existence. You know, the the
primal void out of which the big bang
emerges. Archetypes come
I won't want to say they come later, but
they come
there's a a distance between the one
which is the origin and then where we
are where everything the 10,000 pieces
as the the Dao de Ching says the 10,000
beings.
Uh but yeah, beyond the archetypes and
uh it was after I went through the
archetypes and after I had begun to
experience some of the early
stories of the way the humanity
functions as a single organism. I began
to have experiences there of
reincarnation not of individual souls. I
had some extraordinarily broad
experiences of experiencing the entire
human family pulsing in reincarnation
every hundred years or so another
generation coming in and dying living
their lives. And I began to experience
that there is a a genuine sense in which
it's not only individuals who
reincarnate but individuals are cells
within the body of humanity which is
incarnating and growing and becoming
more collectively but as as a body as a
single being and we are all parts of
that being and there is no private karma
within this being. There is only the
pulsing and nourishing of collective
karma as we grow individually as it
grows uh unitively as a species on this
little piece of the corner of the
galaxy.
And then after spending time in that
territory, I went into a a year of
experiences that I in the book I call
the benediction of blessings. It was
just a cascade of extraordinarily deep
uh experiences that
uh we recognize from the mystical
traditions. One of them for example was
a a deep experience of shunata emptiness
of self.
>> Uh and I where there is no self inside
of you. You're experiencing the world
and its diversity but there's no self
here. There's no self there. There's no
self anywhere. The whole system is
living and breathing as one. just it's a
living experience of the of oneness. And
that's when I began to understand that
no self and oneness were two different
sides of the same coin. Cuz if you have
the experience of no self, then you
naturally open up into the oneness of
life. And if you open into the oneness
of life, then you experience the
transparency of all supposedly separate
selves. There are no separate selves.
Everything is living and breathing
together.
And I had an experience of the cosmic
void of going beyond all time and space
into
something which I think might have be
some approximation
of the field of reality out of which
existence sprang out of which the big
bang came formless and yet the source of
all eventual forms wellthone themes and
and mystical traditions. And I had an
experience one of uh of divine love just
an overwhelming assault of of touching
just briefly the the love that lies at
the fountain of creation and which is
jarring for me because I'm I wasn't
prepared to understand that there was
great genius and intelligence and power
behind creation
>> but that there was love that creation
was an act of love
in service of some much larger cosmic
process. But I had not anticipated that
before. But this love was so
overwhelming. It just
took me uh broke me down into absolute
core warmed places in me that had been
cold for so many lifetimes. And then the
one of the last experiences there uh I
had the experience that I came to call
um the birth of the diamond soul.
Reincarnation had been part of my
thinking you know for a long time by
this point.
But I in the context of a long teaching
session I began to experience all my
lives coming back into me one by one.
And I had done you know past life
therapy for three years. I was familiar
with about a dozen or so of my li my
lives and healed and had been healed by
them and all that kind of stuff. But
these were coming back in very fast.
It's coming back into me. And we reached
a point where they fused.
They became one. And when they fused,
there was an extraordinary explosion in
my heart. And that was an explosion of
diamond light. And I was catapulted
into a state beyond anything I had been
in before. And I was an individual. So
the individual was there, but it was a
soul individuality, not an egoic
individuality. And it was an
individuality that was functioning on a
different order, a different scale than
anything I had known before. And I think
what I was being shown was part of the
story of where reincarnation is taking
us because it wasn't anything that
happens to me is happening to other
people. So it's nothing private about
it.
>> And I was being shown that reincarnation
is not simply about achieving some
spiritual breakthrough or some condition
of enlightenment and then you get to
leave. But reincarnation is taking
humanity is building a fundamental
structure which becomes a new form for
evolution to continue. And that new form
is what we can think of as the soul
which for me is the intelligence, the
consciousness that holds all of our
former lives, all of our lives between
lives. Everything which we've ever
experiences held in that intelligence.
And I think what's happening is that the
soul which most people experience only
when they die and they return to their
natural spiritual condition that if we
expand into the soul and we contract
into ego and expand in the soul sooner
or later that soul is waking up inside
humanity and the soul becomes our true
identity our living identity. And I
think we're seeing this in in our great
spiritual teachers that they're speaking
out of a different sense of reality, a
different identity. And I think we're
all going there.
>> Well, that's beautifully put. You're
very eloquent and and you're taking very
very subtle, delicate ideas and putting
them into English.
>> Trying to
>> You're doing a magnificent job. Very few
people, I think, could communicate as
much as you just did.
>> [snorts]
>> Well, you know, I I I waited 20 years
after I stopped my sessions in 1999. I
waited 20 years before I tried to tell
the story of the trajectory of those
sessions in LSD in the mind of the
universe that was published in 2019.
When I finished my sessions in my
meditation of my a voice said to me 20
years in 20 years out and I thought oh
okay that means it'll take me maybe 20
years to internalize
everything that I had experienced in the
20 years of the journey.
>> Now I'm coming to understand that that
was probably an optimistic read uh that
it really will take many lifetimes to
integrate these experiences. But I do
think that's a significance that there
was 20 years on the journey and then 20
years after the journey before writing
the book. So I really have had a lot of
time to think about these things and of
course to teach about them with my
students.
>> How many total LSD trips uh were
included in this journey?
>> 73.
>> Couldn't we get rounded up to 75? The
universe we got to 73 and the universe
kicked me out and basically said you're
done. That's it. I didn't know I was
done, but the last two sessions are what
I call the goodbye sessions. It just
really they wrapped it up. They gave me
an overview. They showed me how
everything fit together, how what I was
doing at different stages. And then it
gave me one last set of teachings,
personal teachings
as it let me go.
>> Uhhuh. So you haven't had any LSD since
then?
>> I haven't done any serious highdosese
LSD work since then. Okay. I've done
some work with psychedelics with
psilocybin with some iawasa a little bit
with 5meod DMT and San Pedro but lowd
dose nothing pushing the boundaries that
I had been pushing before in fact after
I stopped
and I really haven't done much
psychedelics at all but what little I
have done has been focused on
integrating what I had experienced in
those deep sessions not trying to push
the boundaries ies any further
boundaries
>> and and we should mention you are not
recommending or encouraging other people
to do what you did.
>> Absolutely. In fact, I discourage every
time I'm giving talks, I discourage from
people from doing what I did in the
sense that I'm not discouraging them
from using psychedelics, but
discouraging them from using the
protocol that I did, which was a re a
systematic
constant working with high doses about
five times a year, pushing and pushing
the blowing your mind apart, entering
into some communion, congealing again.
It's just that when you do it that
aggressively,
it becomes a very demanding uh
lifestyle. You spend so much of your of
your energy having to navigate the
ramifications
of your experiences of having to manage
the the implications of it, the physical
subtle energy ramifications.
And I also had a sense in the beginning
I thought there was an end point to the
journey. I thought the goal was to get
to some definite end point where
>> the diamond mind luminosity
>> diamond mind or oneness with God or the
metacosmic void but what I found is that
uh there oneness with God there many
permutations of oneness with God there
many variations and there even
variations of formlessness they're
permutations of that and then I had this
one experience in the middle of the
diamond luminosity years where I
I was cooking in diamond luminosity. I
was totally absorbed, totally happy,
ecstatically in this hyper hyperclarity.
And then my visual field opened. 90° had
turned and I saw reality far in the
distance. And I saw reality there and a
light hit me from that reality. And it
hit me and it just instantly transported
me into a reality even beyond diamond
luminosity. And it lasted only a second
or two.
But then I it totally changed my
understanding my cosmology because
that's when I understood that it's truly
an infinite universe that we are in.
We'll never get to the end of it. No
matter how long we work, we just get to
some deeper balancing point between the
infinite and our individuality.
Now that I know that if I were doing it
over again, I would be much gentler on
myself. I would work with lower doses. I
would be more patient for the longer
term journey because it isn't about
getting to some end point. It's it's
about your living relationship with the
infinity that we are all part of. And
you can to go deeper is not necessarily
to get more.
>> It's a balance. It's a balancing act.
>> Well, that's a lot to digest.
Many many different visions and
obviously incorporating those visions
into your uh life. Has it changed you in
terms of your your mission in life or
your purpose?
>> It has changed me deeply. Um
and I wish it had resulted in a
permanent abiding state of enlightenment
>> as one classically would love to enjoy.
>> Uh and it hasn't produced that but it
has changed me deeply. It's changed my
understanding of life. It's given me a
felt sense of relaxation and enjoyment.
uh the religious traditions that I had
studied professionally
essentially they're all essentially with
variations up and out cosmologies
you achieve salvation grace or
enlightenment and you you come to some
understanding and then you're released
from the wheel of samsara you're
released into some trans samsaric
reality extra samsaric reality to enjoy
bliss in some offplanet paradise over
time I came to understand that
transcendence is only the midpoint of
the journey to to discover the truth of
existence is a wonderful thing to touch
God to be to understand that your nature
and the divine nature are the same
reality that's a wonderful thing but
that's only the midpoint of the journey
the other point the other half is
bringing it in here living it inside
time and space and that's a long long
process my sessions told me toward the
And there's the dying of seeing and the
dying of holding. The dying of seeing I
had done. The dying you have to go
through to see and experience the
communion. But the dying of holding
begins after the sessions or after your
journey. And that's been occupying me
for all the years since 1999.
And that's a long process. But along the
way there's a peace that comes a
relaxation and an appreciation of the
beauty and the genius that we are
surrounded by continuously. And when you
work at a university you know the
primary religion of the university is
science that and and science is
magnificent. You know, I love science,
but it's been mixed with this reductive
materialism,
this carryover from 19th century
thought, which is so debilitating, and
this vision that it's all chance, it's
all screened by necessity, root, and
it's there's no intrinsic meaning to our
existence, and there's certainly no
guidance. And that's a very debilitating
philosophy for undergraduates to absorb
in their life. I mean, that philosophy
would suggest that all of these profound
experiences you've just described were
druginduced hallucinations.
>> Absolutely. They they have no
existential value, no philosophical
value. You know, they're meaningless.
But those th those ideas are usually
held by people who have never had any of
these experiences. People who have those
experiences quickly change their mind
and they realize the the truth of the
experiences even though you know it's
not like no experience is absolute you
know is is not to privilege
overprivilege anyone's experience what's
important I think is not what any one
person experiences but what all of us
experience together and it's putting all
of our experiences on the table together
where we can sift out what's what's
ephemeral what's transitory what's
idiosyncratic from what is really common
ground and that I think we're going to
be moving more and more into in the
years ahead. What's common ground?
>> Your book, The Living Classroom, is
coming out or has just come out recently
in a new edition. And in that addition,
you go back and observe how your
psychedelic uh work of many decades ago,
which was profound and which you kept
hidden from from your students and your
colleagues,
>> actually was influencing them
nonetheless. Yeah, it was kind of the
classroom was kind of like a test case
for actually testing some of the
metaphysical
um implications of these visionary
experiences where you learn uh the
essence of oneness that there is a
fundamental oneness within which we all
exist like we're all in a pool and
anything any ripples we make are touches
everybody in the pool. My students
didn't know anything about my
psychedelic work even when I taught
psychedelics. I was teaching Stan Gra's
work. I never let them know that I was
doing this work myself. It was illegal
and I couldn't let them know. [snorts]
>> And yet I found that they were being uh
touched by my experiences. When I would
be going into deeper breakthrough
levels, I found that they were beginning
to be activated in their own lives uh
just by being around me, just by
encountering some of the ideas. And I
found that there was a certain
transparency developing in my mind which
I was not aware of in the beginning and
I was powerless to control. But I would
just be lecturing on an ordinary day and
I would be reaching for an example to
crystallize some point to make it real.
And I began to have students come up to
me after class and say things like,
"It's funny you use that example that
you used today because that's exactly
what happened to me this week." And I
was not aware of making any paranormal
contact with them.
>> And at first I thought, okay, that's
happen stance. That's, you know, I was
taught to treat that as trivial.
>> But it kept happening and it kept
happening over and over. And I began to
realize something deeper was happening
and I had to understand it. And it took
me a long time to really begin to
understand the fundamental ways in which
fields of consciousness work and
energetic resonance works. So uh I found
that my
my sessions and my immersion into these
deep transcendent states had changed my
psychic makeup in some way
>> that made me kind of uh as a lightning
rod
>> sparking transformation in those of my
students who were receptive to this type
of influence and it wasn't by conscious
intention on my part or design in fact I
had to learn how to manage and control
these forces. Uh how do you ensure uh
freedom of consent and and free will
when this is operating so unconsciously
in the room? And I developed a a a
different way of teaching what you might
call a quantum pedagogy in contrast to a
Newtonian pedagogy. And it's not to
pretend that individual minds don't
exist, but there is that second part,
the quantum fields in which all of our
minds are within a field of mind. Uh,
and so I developed strategies to to
begin to take advantage of this to
empower their learning by using
exercises in the classroom that drew
upon the strength and power of these
collective fields.
Yeah. And when I first wrote the living
classroom, I didn't mention psychedelics
at all because it was 2008. I didn't
want psychedelics to be a red herring
that would prevent these ideas from
being used by teachers up and down, you
know, from K to to graduate schools.
But then later after I had written LSD
in the mind of the universe and I was
out of the psychedelic closet and I was
no longer working at the university,
Sunni invited me to tell the truth
>> in the second edition. And so there I
tell the truth that the what I referred
to in the first edition as spiritual
practices that were taking me deeper
>> into that ground. Those pre-ordal
practices was my psychedelic practice.
And so I'm owning the fact that It
really is the LSD and the mind of the
universe is the backstory
>> to uh the living classroom. And I might
mention that I have been wrestling with
the ideas from the living classroom but
the entire book was downloaded in 10
minutes in one session. It came, it just
dropped in clear. It took me years to
work out all the details, but the
fundamental solution how my why my
students were being activated
>> dropped in in 10 minutes and it was so
clear when I got to my notes and I
looked about it again, I didn't even
write down the details. I knew I had it.
>> Would you say that your psychedelic
experiences
affected your aura?
>> One could e even deeper. I mean, I kind
of, you know, u uh Alex Gay's painting,
his paintings are magnificent, and he's
very good at depicting the enormous
energy that psychedelics can activate.
And so, his figures are figures on fire.
And that's that's very true. Even after
the session is over, your subtle energy
system is running more powerfully than
it had run previously. And this energy
is um
it's it's contagious. States of
consciousness are contagious. Negative
states are contagious. Positive states
are contagious. And it's just an act
it's just a natural fact of nature. So
my energy was triggering their energy.
Now most people were not activated in
this way, but those who were receptive
were activated.
>> And then I imagine it fed back to you
and and influenced you yet again. Yeah.
So there was a often a feedback loop
that would happen. I would say
something, it would open up them. They
they would more energy come into the
room. I would receive it. It would
affect me. Sometimes there was so much
creativity in the room that after the
class was over, I would copy down the
blackboard because I had gotten insights
and seeing things that I had not seen as
clearly, quite as clearly before that
time. Now, I've used LSD a lot myself
and probably over a hundred times, not
as methodically as you have done, but
[clears throat] still with the intent of
doing it for self-awareness and
spiritual purposes. And it and it's led
me to be where I am today. I suppose I I
have no regrets
>> uh whatsoever, but
it can be a little bit debilitating. A
heavy dose of LSD leaves one like the
next day kind of exhausted.
>> Exhausted. Yeah. There is uh when you're
when you open in those deep states, you
know, you open to very high energy
levels of awareness. And I learned that
every deeper level of consciousness
functions at a higher level of energy.
So when you go into those deep levels,
you're opening into high energy. And
after it's all over, you you can feel
tired. Your subtle energy system can
feel achy. And when the more I began to
appreciate the cost of each session to
your body, uh the more I began to
prepare more conscientiously for each
session. So I would do certain spiritual
practices before session and then deeper
different practices. soul integration
practices. After a session, I would make
sure I would have a chiropractic
adjustment and a massage before a
session because I wanted my system to be
as balanced and open as possible to
handle what was about to happen. But it
does it it takes days. I I find that
there's a there's a 24-hour window, then
there's kind of a 3-day window, about a
10day window, and a one month window.
And it it closes gradually. And that's
one of the things I emphasize if you're
working systematically with psychedelics
to have a daily spiritual practice. And
the the deeper you're working with
psychedelics, the more important it is
to have a daily spiritual practice
because it helps you stabilize what
opens for you in those experiences.
Stabilize it and also helps you process
the enormous energy that otherwise would
build up in my body. And by doing
spiritual practice and meditation, it
gave that energy a place to run in
between sessions. So it is it is
challenging. It takes it takes time.
It's not to be taken lightly.
>> Have you looked into the physiological
aspects of LSD? How how it might work? I
know there are different theories. Does
it activate the brain to push you into a
higher level or is it the opposite? Does
it deactivate or activate some parts and
deactivate other parts?
>> Yeah, the default turning off the
default mode network and opening up, you
know, I I pay attention to that and I
try to follow it. I'm not a scientist,
so I don't pretend to be a scientist. uh
but for the most part I let the science
guys work out hold on to those details
and I and I find that when they are
interpreting the physiological data that
they get they usually are working it
within some set of metaphysical
assumptions and some of those
metaphysical assumptions are more
adequate than others and
my metaphysical experience is rather
extreme and so some of that stuff
doesn't seem to me to be getting at the
core. Some of it does, you know,
shutting down the default mode and a
default mode network opens us up to
greater creativity and whatnot,
>> but I think that much of that discussion
still doesn't appreciate the depth of
cosmological
access
>> that can be uh that opens in deep
psychedelic experiences. One of the
problems I think in our history, their
intellectual history around psychedelics
is that many fundamental or in
influential accounts were written after
only a handful of experiences.
>> So uh the doors of perception Aldo Suley
wonderful book after one experience.
>> He was a great writer.
>> He was a great writer and a great
thinker. [snorts] When Houston Smith
wrote Cleansing the Doors of Perception,
which is his collection of his writings
on psychedelics, he had only taken LSD
six times. Uh, and after that he said
the bummers increased and he decided to
hang up the phone, take Alan Watts's
experience. But that sort of
underestimates what can happen if you
don't hang up the phone, if you keep
going back to the well. And when uh
Michael Pollen wrote his book, a very
important helpful book uh how to change
your mind, he had only taken
psychedelics a handful of times, which I
think helps explain some of the
limitations of his interpretation
of how psychedelics work that come in
the end of the book. I think it's
important for us to not just look at the
first few experiences that open, but
what opens in a long lineage of
experiences. And here we have a a lot to
learn from the indigenous cultures who
have been working with psychedelics for
thousands of years and they have a long
lifetime of working with these states
and they there are advanced chapters
that open in the book
only after the preliminary chapters have
been digested.
>> Yeah. Well, I was about to say that I
thought you probably identified yourself
as a philosophical idealist.
Uh, now I'm not so sure because
>> uh I don't think that indigenous
cultures would necessarily go along with
that.
>> Yeah. [snorts]
>> Yeah. And you know,
every psychedelic has a certain
spectrum. It operates on a certain
spectrum of consciousness from even low
dose to high dose. But generally there's
a certain range that it activates. And I
think LSD
tends to what I think of as kind of a
high altitude psychedelic. It tends to
operate activate at higher levels very
high cosmological levels. something like
psilocybin which is such a wonderful
psychedelic which so body oriented and
heart oriented, emotional oriented, it
tends to operate at a at a different
level, a lower level in some ways but a
rich level. And so we have to look at
each particular psychedelic, the
spectrum of consciousness that it
activates, how we can work with each
one. Uh and then we start to put the
puzzle together. does what we learn from
psilocybin, how does that mesh with what
we learn from hiawasa and and LSD?
Pretty soon we start to have a larger
landscape that's waiting for us in these
states.
>> Now, I know you are on the board of
directors of the Gra institute. Is isn't
that correct?
>> Yeah, I'm on the advisory board of Gra
Legacy Training.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I see myself very much in Stan's
lineage. I mean I he's he was the one
who his books gave me the confidence to
go where I eventually went and if I
pushed the boundaries of his paradigm a
little bit here and there I still feel
myself very strongly uh within his
lineage.
>> Well if I understand it correctly and
and I did know Stan quite well in the
days when I lived in California did many
interviews with him. I am under the
impression that
uh he his thrust was that there are ways
to achieve psychedelic states through
breathing exercises and and through
other methods that don't involve
molecules.
>> Yeah. Yeah. and and very he's done that
and demonstrated that in worldwide
workshops and teachings that u and you
can't make breathing illegal and all you
have to do is breathe deeply in a in a
precise kind of way in carefully
controlled circumstances and you act you
amplify consciousness and the same
mechanisms begin to be activated that
can be activated with a psychedelic
substance. So to me psychedelics are are
not to the point.
>> Mhm.
>> It's the nature of consciousness that is
to the point. Psychedelics amplify
consciousness, but it's consciousness
that does the work. And that's why
there's a fundamental convergence of the
vision of reality that emerges in the
great non-csychedelic spiritual
contemplative traditions and the
psychedelic traditions. We're not
discovering a new universe. We're
discovering the same universe using a
different set of of techniques to
explore that universe.
>> So, but I presume you're not actively
engaged in training holotropic therapy
or
>> No, I I made a choice long ago uh not to
u function clinically. I think that's a
different set of skills. you require a
different set of training to when you
work with other people taking other
people into these states. You have to
not only know what you're doing from
having your own experiences in these
states, but you should have a good
strong clinical grounding so you can
recognize when things are not going well
and how to work with other people. I
decided uh to function as an explorer,
as a solitary explorer, to push the
boundaries as far as I could and then to
bring back and share what I had learned
with other people. And I find that
people who respond to LSD in the mind of
the universe, many of them are
psychedelic people themselves, but many
of them are not. Many of them have just
have a long lifelong practice in
meditation or yoga and they recognize a
parallel between what they've
experienced and what I'm describing. And
I think that's really important. It's
consciousness that does the work.
>> Well, I totally agree with you about
that. And uh I guess that's the main
thrust of our YouTube channel as well.
But I wonder
now that you're retired.
>> Yeah. Would you say that uh your your
emphasis is to share with people what
you learned long ago taking LSD or is is
it more that your emphasis is to help
save humanity from itself? [gasps]
>> Well, we haven't touched yet on what's
happening to humanity as a whole, but
>> yeah, I guess first it took me a long
time. You know, I really try to be
candid in the book. The last chapter of
the book is called Coming Off the
Mountain. [clears throat]
>> And uh it took that was the longest
chapter to write. It took me a year to
write that chapter because I had to
really come to terms with what happened
when I stopped my sessions. I thought
having I was carefully attending to
integration all the way up the mountain
really trying to live the values that I
had been shown trying to maintain other
forms of spiritual practice. And I
thought that when it was time to stop
that I would simply be able to withdraw
and hold on to those gems and let them
nourish me. But what I found was that I
had entered so deeply so many times into
the crystallin body of divinity
that uh I began to experience a u an
existential kind of sadness. I knew I I
knew I had to stop. My body was telling
me, my mind was telling me I had to
stop. Um
but and I knew I would never enter into
these states again as deeply until I
died.
uh you can't enter these states simply
by meditating very firmly. Not these
radical states. And [snorts] the sadness
of not being able to enter into
communion with my beloved for years was
very hard at first. It took me a long
time. It took me about 10 years to
really
become committed to living on this
planet again with feet solidly grounded.
uh and which is another reason why I
wouldn't encourage people to do what I
did. uh because I I knew that somewhere
along the line I had made a mistake and
I didn't know where that mistake was and
I turned to examine my history to find
out where the mistake was and I began to
realize that I had lost the balance the
critical balance between transcendence
and eminence between going leaving time
space and going into the infinite and
then being grounded in time space which
is the other important truth And I had I
was basically overextended. I was
spiritually overextended and I made a
conscious decision to ground myself
inside the planet on in my life. But the
second reason that it was hard is
because I wasn't allowed to talk about
my experiences. I'm a teacher. I love to
share information. I wasn't allowed to
share that information. So writing LSD
in the mind of the universe was the
beginning of healing that wound of
silence so that I could take the two I
had I had split my life in two hearts. I
was a professor and I was a psychonaut.
But finally being honest about my
experiences allowed those to come back
together and I began to be whole within
myself and that process continues. So
what I what I've been asking myself in
see the years since LSD in the mind of
the universe has been published is how
can I be useful?
>> How can I how can I make this unusual
journey which I've taken useful to other
people without I'm not teaching them to
go into these states. I'm not holding
their hand while they go into these
states. That's other people's work. The
holotropic breath work people, the other
psychedelic therapists, that's what
they're doing.
I'm basically
first I I don't really have an agenda.
I'm comfortable uh just being writing my
life out as it is. I don't have any felt
need to accomplish anything or to do
anything. But I like to be helpful. I'd
like to be useful. And I think that
means convening circles of conversation
around the themes of the book. uh
drawing people in, inviting people in
who have psychedelic experiences,
drawing people in who have spiritual
experiences without any psychedelics
involved so that we can together process
the deeper mysteries of life that
psychedelics can reveal. [clears throat]
And uh slowly that seems to be taking
shape. I basically go where I'm invited.
I don't really seek invitations, but if
people want to have conversations about
these things, I'm happy to go there.
>> Well, you're certainly invited to come
back here. [laughter]
>> Yeah. Now we go to actually one of the
most surprising aspect of the journey
was insights into where humanity is in
his spiritual evolution and where it's
going
>> which I didn't even I had no idea that
this was possible when I went into this
work but it actually became one of the
dominant motifs of the work and I kept
on having visions over a six-year period
of humanity coming to a turning point uh
coming to a before and after history
epicm turning point that we were going
into a a time of profound spiritual
awakening, profound spiritual
breakthrough.
And this went on for years,
but it never showed me how we were going
to get there. I looked around, I didn't
see us I saw us heading to the mall and
to the football stadium as much as to a
spiritual breakthrough. Mhm.
>> And then I had that experience in one
session which took me deeply into the
future not as Chris Bash but again
dissolved into the collective psyche and
gave me the experience of the death and
rebirth that humanity is coming into a
time of profound deconstruction the time
of loss of control. A time of great s
existential suffering which is global
not not national or individual it's just
global
a time which will the suffering will be
so severe at least in my experience that
we might think it will be an extinction
event that we are coming to the end of
the line for humanity on this planet
we've so overdrawn and overtaxed our
systems but at least in my experiences I
was shown that we come through this
exper experience. We're reduced in
number, but we come through this
experience. And something about the
depth of suffering that we encounter
opens us up at the deepest level of our
being. It opens our heart and it opens
our mind.
And there were a lot of teachings around
nonlinear systems and what happens when
the collective psyche, the collective
unconscious is activated at such a deep
level. But that in this period of
history, we are giving birth to the next
iteration of humanity. And I think it
has to do with the the birth of the
diamond soul. I think we are coming, we
can no longer afford to live in a planet
which is being run by egos, even
well-intentioned egos. We need to grow
up if we're really going to survive as a
species. And I think growing up means
growing into the great age which has
been gestating within us for thousands
and thousands of years. Letting that age
express itself and taking us forward. So
I think that we are coming into a time
of intense suffering, intense labor but
magnificent outcome. The birth of the
future human is the birth of a mag. And
many many people have this insight. They
have these insights. the indigenous
people have these insights.
>> I I'm aware of that. We've done other
interviews with visionary thinkers who
see this. And I always wonder though,
can we be sure we're going to come out
of the crisis? It seems to me we're very
close to extinction.
>> We are.
>> And and there's to as far as I know uh
the future isn't fixed.
>> Yeah.
>> There's no guarantee that we're going to
pull through. no probabilities,
extrapolating probabilities. And it does
look very dire. And some very wise and
wellinformed individuals think that
we've we're already extinct. We just
don't know it. We're living out the last
years of an exhausted planet. And I
understand that. And I don't have an
empirical evidence that would argue
against that. All I have is my visionary
experience. And in the I've had
experiences of the future human. And in
the last great vision of my journey was
in the 70th session. The the last
vision. It took me it stripped me down
mercilessly. It was the largest strip
down deepest strip down I went through
in any of my journeys.
And it took me eventually deep into the
future. And it gave me a series of
teachings. But the core of it was it
gave me an experience of the future
human.
So that for me and and the future human
that I experienced was just
just magnificent. It's not an improved
humanity. It's a radical shift in the
fundamental baseline of humanity.
So for me, I cannot doubt that we will
make it through it because I've been
given the experience that we do make it
through it. But I understand it is
everything. We have to reach deep
>> because there are no guarantees in
nature.
We have to reach deep and work very hard
to realize the opportunity that's coming
our way.
Well, Chris Bage, what a magnificent
time to share with you the ups and downs
of this glorious vision. I'm so glad
that you've come to Albuquerque to be
with me and uh to open up your heart and
your soul to to me and to the new
thinking aloud audience. Chris, thank
you so much.
>> Thank you, Jeeoff. It's been a wonderful
conversation and I'm honored deeply. you
who have been in this field for so long
and touched so many people's lives. It's
true privilege to sit with you.
>> Well, I I am honored to sit with you. I
can tell you that someone who who has
explored psychedelics just about as far
as is possible.
>> Thank you.
And for those of you watching or
listening, thank you for being with us
because you are the reason that we are
here.
[music]
>> [music]
>> For early access to our videos and live
stream events, sign up for our free
weekly newsletter at new
thinkingaloud.org.
>> Book four in the new thinking aloud
dialogue series is Charles T. Tart 70
years of exploring consciousness and
parasychology
now available on Amazon.
>> New thinking Aloud is presented by the
California Institute for Human Science,
a fully accredited university offering
distant learning graduate degrees that
focus on mind, body, and spirit. The
topics that we cover here. We are
particularly excited to announce new
degrees emphasizing parasychology and
the paranormal. Visit their website at
cihs.edu.
You can now download all eight copies of
the New Thinking Aloud magazine for free
or order printed copies. Go to
newthinkingaloud.org.